I will turn it over to you, Chris. Well, thank you very much. I will share.
Can everybody see everything okay?
Looks perfect. Looks good. Great. So yes, thanks again for our studio for hosting this. I think
it's really exciting that we can kind of get together as a healthcare community and start
to share some of the work we're doing with R and with Shiny and some of the things that we'll see
today. I hopefully can spark some conversation going forward among all of us.
Oops, let's see. Sorry. There we go. So just a little background on Children's. Children's
Wisconsin has been around for about 125 years, a little bit more. We had our anniversary a few
years ago. It was originally founded just by seven philanthropists in Milwaukee who just,
they rented a house and it had 10 beds and it was this very humble beginnings.
And then throughout the 125 years that we've grown and grown, we've had a couple moves. We were on
a building on Marquette University's campus for a while and now we've moved to the medical
Milwaukee Regional Medical Center, MRMC, which is in the background of this slide.
And there we are also joined by Fray Dirt Healthcare. It's an adult system as well as
the Medical College of Wisconsin. So Children's is a learning hospital. And so their attitude,
I think really helps foster a lot of the innovation that we get to explore using R and
Shiny currently. And so we're definitely well supported and curiosity and innovation are two
of our core values. So hopefully that'll shine through today as I start to show you some of
the things we're working on. As such, we get to, you know, we get to work with everybody across
the system. And so I think this is one of my favorite quotes. John Tukey not only gave us
box plots, he gave us this good quote where as a statistician or a data scientist or an analyst,
we get to work with, in all different areas, things you would never expect in other
disciplines. I think Children's lets us, especially as part of the enterprise analytics
team that my data science program is part of, we get to work with quite a few different people
across the system. And you can see Children's is really more than just a hospital for acute
things that are chronic conditions. We do have two hospitals. We have a level one trauma center
and emergency department. But we also do research with the medical college. Children's Social
Service Society of Wisconsin came under the Children's Wisconsin umbrella in 2004. So we also
have a foster care and and child and family well being. And that's part of what I'm going to show
today was one of the projects that I worked on with regard to youth placed in group homes.
And we also have primary care, especially care clinics. We have interesting programs with school
nurses where we put our nurses will be in Milwaukee public schools to make sure kids are
getting the care they need, when we can get that when we can have access to them. And then we also
have a health plan. So we actually have a part of Children's that actually provides a health plan
and make sure kids are covered and get the preventative care that they need. So it really
is more than just a hospital. And this gives us all the different backyards to kind of play. And
so it's kind of exciting thing as this slide just gives a quick background. We have over 90 locations,
all generating tons of data that we try and collect as best we can in our
enterprise data warehouse. So we do have quite an impact on the state of Wisconsin,
especially for kids, because we know that they're unique, you know, you can't put a kid in an adult
size bed, you know, they have different, different needs. And so we really try and cater to that.
So I thought I would jump in and give a kind of a quick example of some of the work we've done with
our and shiny and then kind of come back around and say, Well, how did we get here? Because this
certainly isn't the first thing we attempted to do in our and we kind of grew the our our practice
as we went along. It's definitely been probably a seven or eight year journey, as it's people
commonly say, for us to kind of get to this point where we actually are can rapidly deliver some
really interesting insights using our and shiny. So the missing and missing OHC use is out of home
care youth. These are our youth who are generally placed are removed from their homes in some kind
of dangerous situation, maybe there's safety concerns, maybe there's something going on in
the house that isn't safe, and they've been have case managers assigned to then we place them the
best we can either in foster care, or in sometimes group homes. So this project originally kicked off
where we were trying to understand youth who are leaving that placements when they go missing. So
these youth are generally 12 to 18 years old, they're active in the community, they have friends
across the community, and they go missing and we're responsible for them, but yet we don't know
where they are. And so that's not a good situation to be in, of course. So as we started to work with
our social services partners, we looked at reasons why kids would go missing. But we kind of put a
twist on it. And we started to look at reasons why they stay the ones who stayed, why are they staying,
and we were trying to do some analysis with respect to that. Our case management team serves
about 1200 youth annually. And that's just in Milwaukee County. Milwaukee County is a very unique
area in that the county itself doesn't handle the case management services. There's two organizations
contracted and Children's is one of those to provide that. So we each get about half of those kids.
And then we also look for permanency, of course, for these kids as we're placing them in these
these homes, but hopefully it's in a safer situation, which is what we're going after.
So what does it really mean to be missing? It's anyone younger than 18. That's the federal law,
right? They're unknown to their legal guardian. For DCF, Department of Child and Family for the
state of Wisconsin, it's if they're missing more than eight hours, and we don't know where they are,
it has to be reported. The good thing for us then is that gets recorded in the state's
Child Welfare Information System, the SACWIS. And so we can then actually use that data to try and
understand when they went missing. We know kids where they're staying for both our agency and the
other agency that's managing care in this county. And then we can actually kind of have rosters of
kids so we know who was staying together at a time, who went missing at the same time, and we
can build out timelines. And so that's part of the interesting work that you'll see here in a second.
What you'll notice here in this plot is sometimes there can be up to 40 kids who are missing. And so
that's quite a bit, right? We're going, oh my gosh, there's 40 kids that we're responsible for
as an organization. We don't know where they are. They really needed to have us be involved to help
understand what the trends were because it's been increasing. So as a good statistician or good data
scientist, the first thing we did was we tried to look at some of the factors that were involved
this year as an example of a survival analysis we did of looking at if a child is placed into
a family setting either with a relative or in a foster home where it's a smaller setting,
not a group home, they have a much more success in not going missing as well as
staying in that setting for longer, a longer period of time. Once we found these kind of
interesting factors that got us some credibility to keep working on this problem. And it certainly
led to more questions as we went along. And so the extra questions that we had,
there were too many and it was too dynamic, right? We were kind of going, well, what if this,
what's going to happen if someone does go missing? How many are going missing? Where are
they leaving or going missing from? And where were they possibly removed from to where they were
placed? And so we started to think about, well, what could we do to answer these questions in a
more dynamic fashion? And that's where Shiny came in for sure. So this is a screenshot of
the application and I'm going to run through and give you a quick demo of one of our applications.
So it's called, sorry about that. So this is called, we called it the missing out-of-home
care youth explorer. And so we really were trying to explore this population of kids
who have been removed and then placed under our care. And so we pulled the information from our
state's child welfare system, which is that SACWIS I mentioned. We also pulled a bunch of
other data together from the Census Bureau and understanding that the environment we're
placing the kids into. And then we started to think of ways to visualize that. So I can,
just from this dashboard view, we gave a quick view of the kids who were missing. So people,
these are case managers will use this application now to look at kids. And I should mention before I
go any further that this is all anonymized data. So everything you're seeing here,
we've truncated some of the data and we've anonymized names. So none of this is
real, real children. It represents the same relationships though underneath.
So these, these are the kids that could be currently missing. So they can look on a
dashboard. We can also look at placement providers who may be having a lot of kids go missing from,
maybe those aren't the right places for us to be putting kids who are, we deem at risk.
And at risk means maybe they aren't a known trafficker. In this case, a lot of the times
we're looking at kids who maybe are involved in human trafficking. If you've seen the news and
heard about Jeffrey Epstein, you know, trafficking is rampant. Milwaukee is one of the areas that it
really has had a big impact. So we actually start to look at where can we safely place kids that
maybe aren't as risky of a situation. If there's someone else, there is a known trafficker. We
don't want to put someone who is younger possibly, or maybe potentially at risk of being trafficked.
I'm going to jump then to the next. So the first thing we thought of is, well,
why don't we look at kids when they're placed together? So co-locations. So we know when kids
are together, and then we know when they go missing. So let's look at like a social network
of this. And so let's try and build out what it might mean for these kids to be missing.
And when they leave together, how does that visualize? So if you look here, this is using
iGraph and VizNetwork, if you know some of the packages that are involved.
And it's an interactive graph then of all the kids and the relationships. When have they been
placed together? Thicker lines mean that they've been placed co-located together more often. So if
I highlight a line, for instance, you'll see that there's been nine co-locations between Toshika
and Rialta. And then the bigger the dots mean that they have more connections in the network.
And this is just the network of kids who are either currently missing
or are related one step away from someone missing. Like if we looked at the overall network of
placements, you'll see it's much busier. It's like this is just a big web of movement. But
what we're really interested right now is in these kids who have gone missing
and trying to investigate. So if I come back here and take a look at
some of the kids, I'm going to click on one right here. So I clicked on a name and see I get
information about them. We started to create a score of influential kids in the network.
And so I clicked on a blue link. And this is someone who's at risk of being trafficked.
They also have a lot of connections in this network. So it gives us an ability to kind of
score them and say, yeah, there's some risk here. Let's take a look. We haven't done a lot of work
with the scoring profiles yet. That is something that is a future ask for us.
But what I can do then is if we pick someone interesting in the network,
we can actually go look at their individual network. So this is regardless if missing or not
or how many steps away, this is all the people they've ever been placed with or associated with.
And you'll see, again, I can kind of zoom in. Whoops. And then if I look at the color coding
of this network, suspected means that we actually have had someone, a case manager,
and we have liaisons with law enforcement. We somehow have tagged them as it's suspected that
they're involved in trafficking. So again, we can look at that. If I click on a person here,
like Magali Nibbs, or if we click, you can click away here and click on another one,
you'll see it'll change here, Anna Lee Mody. So they'll have their information of where they're
currently placed. And if someone goes missing, that might be a person that we might want to
reach out to, or we might want to investigate where is Anna Lee. And so we can also add her.
So if she's suspected of trafficking, we can add her to this network. And now you'll see,
we'll start to get a picture of how do they know each other? How have they been placed together?
When were they placed together? We can actually look at timeline views as well of this. And so
these are some of the people they know together. So if someone is missing, and then like Enid was,
is there someone else missing in this group? And this might be a reason why they've gone missing,
or maybe we could help find people. And now you can also see, we're starting to get some of the
red dots. And these are confirmed traffickers who we're still responsible for. They're placed in a
group home in the city right now. And you can see they're one, two, three steps away as far as
relationships go. So there definitely could be some trafficking involved. So this is one view,
I guess, of what we had done to understand what's going on and to be helping the case managers in
making better placements. You may not want to place someone who's at risk if there's a
confirmed trafficker at a location, and you have choices of where to put them in a group home,
for instance, different group homes, you could place them in a different location.
So it's really helping to inform that case management and placement services.
Our second view then, so that was one view is a social network. If we look at it from a different
perspective, we could also think about it from a geographic perspective. And this is where we're
thinking about, where are kids getting placed? And where have they been removed from? Where are
their support structures? As we're starting to think about placing kids in safe places,
but also in places that they still have friends, you can't just take them out of their environment,
plunk them down somewhere else and expect them to be successful, put them in a new school.
So as we collaborate with the social workers and the case managers, they help us to understand that
there are some effects that maybe we could help inform them again, of where the best places are
to place these kids. So I'm going to grab so I'm here, we're using leaflets, and I'll kind of do a
recap at the end of all the technology behind this. But we're using leaflet markers and marker
groups to kind of hold together all the placement providers. So this is a list of all the placement
providers in the city. So this is Milwaukee, you can see there's kind of a geofence around
the different markers of where these placement providers are. If I scroll in or zoom in here a
little more, we'll start to get a look at the city. And then you can kind of see Milwaukee is
kind of bisected by a east-west freeway I-94 is right here. So we can kind of see north of 94,
there's a lot more placement providers. And these either, as we scroll and you'll see it's
color coded markers that are either a foster home, maybe a relative or a group home. As we get to
some of the green dots, you'll see these become like, these are group homes that are in the city.
The names are changed, but these are actually different group homes across the city.
And we can track who is there right now, if they've ever had a trafficker, and those pop-up
bubbles on the markers will explain that. So now we can start to get a good look at the city.
And one thing the case management noticed right away is how many more placement providers are to
the north of I-94 versus the south. In a second, I can show you the removal map. And you can see
we remove equally from both sides of the highway, but it seems like there's more placement providers
being licensed, more group homes being licensed to the north of the city. So we're taking kids
out of the south side and putting them on the north side, and then they're going to go missing.
And it's just this kind of circular events that we know is going to happen. So now we're trying
to think about how we can creatively put more of those group homes to the south side if neighborhoods
can approve them, certainly. One thing we did, so first we started thinking, okay, geographic
placement. Then we started to think about what other factors are involved, what's important to
know. So we actually brought in data from the gun violence archive, because Milwaukee also has,
you know, many people do as a violence. Gun violence is a big issue today. We brought
in gun violence, and we can actually lay the gun violence events on top of this.
So this is the gun violence for the last six months on the map. And here you can see
we're putting these group homes right into such a dangerous area, right? All the group homes that
these kids are being placed at are going into the same area of the city where a lot of our
gun violence is occurring. So this is also very informative, because we do have
people who advocate for us at the state and federal level.
Showing information like this is very helpful to us from an advocacy perspective.
Okay, if I ask a few of the questions. Oh, absolutely.
Because you were just mentioning the data that you bring in as well.
Pat asked a question. How is all the data collected, cleaned, stored, and retrieved
that fuels this great work? Yeah, that's a great question. So
certainly the data science team is a small team. We don't have a ton of data scientists. We sit
within the analytics group. And so we actually have data engineers in the analytics team who
get shared. And so we use them to actually bring in a lot of this data, and we store it. We have
a data warehouse that it gets stored in. And then we pull that what we need into like an R data file
for Shiny to use. But the data engineers do that cleaning and scrubbing and bringing the data
together for us. We kind of collaborate with them. I think the data scientists a lot of times will
take that first pass and just take a rough cut of the data, think about what we need and look
for quality issues and distributional issues. And then they'll automate that and productionalize it.
Great. Thank you. And just a ton of people saying what an incredible use case,
really so powerful the work that you're showing us.
Oh, thank you. Thank you. Yeah.
I'll just ask two other questions here just to take a little break in between so we don't save
them all for the end. But Jake asks, what are you using to link iGraph to the selected youth
info panel? Is that Crosstalk or something else?
I don't know if I follow that question. So can I see that in the chat or is that so linking?
I think linking that like info panel over to the right. And Jake,
feel free to jump in here and add any other context.
Yeah, when you click on a point, it then populates that info chart.
Yes.
How you were like doing the selected point and having Shiny. So Crosstalk is a package that
will help link together. But I was curious how you're getting.
I think we're capturing, I would have to look at the code because this is,
I should have said at the beginning, this is something I worked on two years ago. This is
one of our first Shiny apps. But I believe I'm just capturing the point and then I'm popping it
up. I don't think I even use Crosstalk. There's events that come off of that iGraph off this
network. And I believe I'm capturing that and then looking at the panel. But I could follow
up with you after for sure to show you what I did or talk about it. Yeah.
Thanks, Chris. One other question. Just briefly, I know you mentioned these are all anonymous
names now or have been anonymized. Is that package available externally?
That is actually something that I created for this. It's something that we could probably think
about how we would get that out into GitHub. But for right now, it's that switch at the beginning
and stuff is something I created. And I do pull names. I think I was telling Rachel yesterday,
we pull names from the Census Bureau and just anonymize male, female and yeah.
Awesome. Thanks, Chris. Yeah.
Yep. So in the interest of time, I'll just skip ahead a little bit. So you've seen the maps and
on top of this, we also started to look at how we could maybe show, depict the city in different
ways. And so this is where we were talking about using census data and American Community Survey
data. The neighborhood stress model, it's a scoring model that looks at stressful areas.
The city, it was developed at the University of Massachusetts. This was the first use case we
did of this. And it actually proved very useful. So it was interesting, again, to see
where we have our homes, our group homes and our foster homes mostly placed are in very stressful
areas of the city. And what does it mean to be stressful? If you look at this, it looks at
poverty, it looks at unemployment, public assistance, and then education factors from
the community survey and the census. And then we lay that back on that map then for them, again,
to understand as we start to license more group homes and foster homes, we maybe don't want to
always put them in the stressful areas of the city, right? That's like, I think it was an
interesting way to illuminate that. And this is down to the census tract level. So that's why
you're seeing it kind of very granular. So it's interesting look at kind of that same parts of
the city and just in a different way, without having to just say income or race and kind of
show those standard things that we always see on a map. The stress score was a very interesting one.
So we've run that stress score now. And that's part of our ongoing modeling. Every year when
the ACS gets updated in December, we rerun the stress scores for the city. And then we use this
in multiple apps and analyses as we go as we look at population health inside Milwaukee and Milwaukee
County. I think I am going to go ahead and continue on in my slides. I can definitely,
we could easily spend another hour looking through all the data in here. But I think it'll
be important to kind of get through and show you a couple other examples of some shiny work and some
R Markdown and things like that, that we've done. But this was definitely, as I was mentioning,
and when I was answering some of the questions, this was really our first big shiny app as a data
science team that we developed. And so it was really over the course of, after we did that
initial factor analysis, it was kind of during the course of 2018 that we worked on this. So
it's really came together well, and it gave us a foothold to kind of work with other teams
throughout the organization. Once they saw this, we had a data symposium as an analytics team,
and we were able to demo this and talk about the work we've done. And it opened up a lot of doors
across the organization to partner with other people. So one success kind of just rolls into
the next. Implementation-wise, these are some of the packages that we used as we started to build
out that application. There's a lot of data preparation. Even with the data warehouse and
the cleaning and scrubbing, we still had to do some probabilistic record matching. That's the
fast link package, because there isn't a common ID in that statewide child welfare information
system. We sometimes have to match on name and address or location, so we'll use fast link for
that. We do some graph manipulation, obviously, with iGraph, and then we get statistics off the
graph with CINAH, things like that. And then you saw some of the work from the visualization side
with data table and high charter and leaflet. Shiny dashboard, that look and feel of a dashboard,
that's kind of our adopted standard right now. And you'll see that in a couple of examples here
in a couple of minutes. Kind of our analytic journey as an analytics team. I report to our
director of analytics, and so this is our development as an analytic team. I thought it
was interesting to kind of to lay this out and then also then think about our growth of how we
started to use R during that same time frame is when we started to really bring R along in the
organization. So it started back in 2013 before we could even think about using Shiny or anything
else. I know Shiny was very in its early stages at that point, but it was really just a limited
number of people who kind of brought it forward and maybe evangelized it a little in the organization,
got some small wins, or thinking, oh, that looks cool, that ggplot looks cool, how did you do that?
And then we started to kind of grow that. At the same time, you know, our SAS and SPSS licenses
come up for renewal, and we start to think about, well, could we use R for this? Why wouldn't we use
R for this? Or we see something cool like the Shiny app that you think, oh, my gosh, look at how
you can really stand on the shoulders of giants as far as all the packages that are available.
And then we just kept, it's kind of kept snowballing to the point now where as we start
to look forward, we think, well, is this a scriptable first solution? Is this something
we're going to have to redo? And then, you know, we actually are bringing along other analysts in
our analytics team to understand and be able to use R and apply it to the same requests that they
would normally possibly use Excel or standard SQL reporting tools for as well. We, you know,
push out Office documents as we need to, generating them with R Markdown and Word or OpenXLSX
and generating spreadsheets if we need to, and then schedule that all in RStudio Connect
and push it out. So we really have gotten in this, looking back, it feels like it's a short
amount of time. I know it's probably six to eight years, but we really have come a long way as far
as using R. And I think the whole community has as well. Just a quick snapshot, I thought just
to kind of level set everyone where we're at. We have really at this point now in 2021,
integrating ourselves into the IS environment. So we're actually using our Active Directory for
logging in either to RStudio Workbench or to Connect. Our users use it. We use all the data
warehouse and we have the secure links. So we don't have to kind of sit to the side as we
were when we were first kind of doing the prototypes and proof of concepts.
We actually have a full-blown kind of environment that's integrated. Again, we still have, this is
just for the data science group, we still use like Tableau and ClickView and things like that,
SSRS for reporting, as well as the line of business applications and their internal reporting.
But it feels like we're, you know, equivalent to them in a lot of ways where maybe at first when
you're doing those prototypes, you're not. So just a quick background on that.
And then I thought I could maybe show a couple more examples of some of the work we've done.
These will be just some slides and I'll talk through them a little bit.
The COVID ones, everybody has a COVID dashboard. I was joking yesterday with Rachel and Shannon.
And we were no different, right? We were trying to get all the information we could because there
wasn't really good information at first. I know Johns Hopkins and their dashboard, it became the
standard, the gold standard people kind of lived by or went to and referred to. But at the early
parts of it, we were scraping the same kind of data they were and trying to get a picture of
what's going on in Wisconsin, especially with kids, because at that point, we didn't know what
the impact would be on kids. So we started to build out what I was thinking was going to be
just a public or a population health kind of dashboard. Once we started to show this, then
people became interested in adding in internal information. So we wanted to look at other things
besides just positive case rates and things like that. So we started to think about what would our,
how else can we help across the community?
Excuse me. And across the children's community, the internal community.
And so a couple of use cases popped up during our response, including that dashboard I just saw the
screenshot for. We also started to think about during lockdown, we still had to serve the kids
who needed to have acute cases or needed surgeries. So we wanted to make sure that they got the care
they needed. And we had a very, very restricted list of people who could come to campus. So we
generated Excel spreadsheets every day and pushed them out to the people. These are things that we
couldn't quickly do on our EHR, but we were able to do that using R and RStudio and just kind of
push and create that spreadsheet and kind of give them exactly what they wanted. You know,
instead of saying, well, here's a report you can run from a reporting server, we generated,
and there's other ways to do this certainly, but it kind of fit well with what we were doing already
within RStudio Connect to extend that. Same with surgical cases, elective cases were being
canceled. The concern then became, are we, are we sure all the kids who had an elective case
canceled were getting the care they needed? You know, at some point, did they reschedule?
And so we started to think about how do we track that recovery? And then we also were monitoring
patients being tested. When they came to campus, they had to have a test 24 hours before and also
employees as they were working, we were doing testing for that too. We wanted to understand
and inform our leadership that this was occurring and that the rates were low enough to feel
comfortable. And then we did a bunch of recovery work. Also, we had to update our, you know,
our time series models. And we start to think about how we were projecting volumes that come
into different clinics and things like that. Obviously the volumes crashed during lockdown.
So we updated those models, tried to predict best we could, because we didn't know what the
new environment was going to look like. So that was some of the work that we did. And I'll show
you a couple of examples here. Whoops. First is a little bit more, this is the dashboard.
Telehealth was a new thing for us also. We didn't have a lot of telehealth presence before COVID and
the pandemic. So we started to monitor that and we gave them a couple of views of interactive
charting, either with high charter here or else CG plot just wrapped in Plotly.
And then we could kind of see, you can see the huge spike we had in telephone
encounters, for instance, right away. Those stopped being reimbursed, so they dropped off,
but we could still continue to monitor that. And then also, as you can see here on the left-hand
side, we also took a look at, we've added vaccinations now. We looked at regions of
the state. We looked at Wisconsin, as far as in the north central U.S. to look at our borders,
because we didn't want to limit it just to some arbitrary geographic boundary
and to understand what was going on in our environment.
Testing. This was another nice ad we did. We already had lab testing and lab reporting,
but here we extended it quickly with some existing GG plots. And then we just pushed it out with
Blastula on our Studio Connect again, informing all of our hospital leadership of the testing
rates, again, for patients as well as employees. Here's an example of that surgical case recovery
email that was going out every day. At first, it was very scary, right? We were saying how many
cases have been canceled and how many have been completed. And you can see it was, it definitely
took a while to tip back over past 50% or into late last summer, where we started to actually
start to recover that casework and make sure that the kids were, had the surgery or had any kind of
procedure they needed and had it performed. And here again, we pushed out information by service
as well at the bottom of this email. And this went to the entire surgical services leadership,
so they could say, well, this service is performing well, but maybe GI, for instance,
wasn't getting all of their cases recovered that they should have, or they should have some
follow-ups. So we would offer resources to help do that follow-up and contact patients and their
families. And for this, we used, again, our Markdown Blastula, pushing it from Connect.
And then we used, this was one of the first uses of GT, that new table package, which I think was a,
which is a real nice package to use for creating tables if you're used to using cable.
And then finally, we built another Shiny app, again, to kind of update and look at ways we
could think about modeling what our response looks like. This, the black line you can see
is kind of that crash where orange is what we were expecting for volumes. Black is kind of
that true crash. And then we were trying to model what it looked like in the, in the days or months
after the pandemic, when we started to come out of lockdown. And we use external data. So it was
an interesting use of using like Google mobility data and Apple, you know, we had their mobile
mobility data. So we could start to see movement in Milwaukee and Southern Wisconsin,
Southeastern Wisconsin. We also got consumer spending data from Wamplee and then job postings
and from Burning Glass, I believe it was. So we could look at activity in the environment and try
and look for correlations or see if there was any kind of, kind of variation we could tease out of
that to see if that maybe could help us inform our models. And so it was kind of a short-term
project where we just started to look at what it might be to look like recovery looks like,
and will we get back to any kind of level of normal? And then we actually sat with some of
the leaders from our ambulatory side, from our outpatient side and inpatient, and just started
to talk about what we were seeing in the environment. Cause we knew the volumes were
going to be down across the board. How are we doing on time? We're doing okay, Rachel?
Yeah. Do we have more questions or? We do have a few more questions. Okay.
Question break. Yeah. I'd say one of the most upvoted questions right now is more around the
org structure of your data science program and how you've gotten buy-in to build R into the analytics
infrastructure. Yeah, that's a great question. And I regret that I don't have a slide on that.
I did think about that yesterday after we reviewed these. But so our, I think the buy-in,
well, two things, I guess. So yeah, our analytics team, we have kind of an analytics team
back in 2012, 2013, we brought the majority of the analysts together into an enterprise
analytics group. So instead of having them dispersed among the departments within children's,
we brought them together to try and understand. It was at the same time we were bringing in our
new EHR. And so it was a perfect time to kind of bring everybody together, get them all level
set on data and data sources. And then at some point we would maybe spin them back out, right?
But we used an analytics center of excellence instead where we would reach out to any kind of
power users maybe to help share that load. But most of the analysts still sit within this
enterprise team. And that's the team that data science is part of. And so we have plenty of
analysts. And then we have like two to three data scientists, including myself who work on
kind of these more strategic or longer term projects. To get buy-in, I think, again,
I touched on it a little bit, but I really think it's those small wins, like where you can actually
get in kind of deep dive, learn all you can, and then produce something that is like, wow,
or find some insight. And I know it's hard to predict that that's always possible.
But I think we've been lucky in that we've had some very curious counterparts on the business
side at the hospital that worked with us to help us get that success. And then once we did,
they wanted to share it, right? And so we used the open source Shiny server at first.
But then once we got to a point, we needed to be able to have that tied into Active Directory
and share security because not everybody can see every application or analysis we do.
And that's where I think we started to get that toehold to bring our end more fully.
Awesome. And Chris, this might be a little bit related to the buy-in question, but the
next most upvoted question is, how did you decide when to use Shiny,
as well as like R versus Tableau or other UI tools?
Yeah, that's a great question, too. I think, because I always questioned that myself, right?
It's like, how much do we want to take on as a data science team when I'm thinking about the
program as a whole, because we need to do these on an ongoing basis. And we do have BI developers
who are specialized in QlikView. And so I think the choice usually comes down to, at first, we'll
do mostly static and ad hoc kind of analysis. And then as we start to see if there's going to be
a maybe a little bit longer term need to have some interactivity, we'll bring in Shiny. You
usually, though, it starts out with maybe R Markdown, maybe some interactive,
like a Flex Dashboard that's maybe a little lighter weight. If it's something that's truly
line of business, counts, volumes, things like that, or we have an existing QlikView app for,
we'll push the work towards that side. So that's kind of our decision point, I think.
Great, thank you. One more question for now is, how open is data access for your data science team
within the organization? That is, yes. So our data science team, I definitely, and even our analysts,
we are, it's fairly open. We have access to just about everything we need or we can get access to.
We definitely have security on all of our data science teams. We have a lot of data science
on all those different data sets, but the data science team,
if we need some kind of access, we usually are able to get it. So it hasn't been an issue.
Great, thanks, Chris. Yeah.
So I'm going to spend maybe just five more minutes talking about something we're currently working on.
We're thinking about, in the hospital, adding or kind of moving around some of the units and what
kind of cohorts of patients they're responsible for. And this is coming out of the need for,
as we know, there's kind of a mental health crisis maybe coming our way. And it's certainly
true for children as well. So we'd like to think about maybe, do we add a mental health
or behavioral health unit at the hospital, for instance, or do we partner or what do we do?
And so they had a couple ideas about what maybe we could do with groups of patients and placing
them on different units in the hospital. But we didn't really have a good way to say,
all right, well, A, we know that outpatient volumes are increasing and inpatient volumes
are probably decreasing. That's a standard trend in healthcare. But we didn't know how,
what percentage of maybe a base year, like say we take 2019 volumes and we think, well,
what percentage of 2019 volumes will we recover in 2021 because of the pandemic? And so we created a
tool that used to kind of a Monte Carlo simulation of different ways that we could look at slicing
up these volumes. And we did it by cohorts of kids. And then we placed cohorts of kids
on units and projected out a year, basically using the different parameters that I was just
referring to as far as sampling percentages. We know that, let's just say 2019 volumes, we know
that maybe we're going to see 90% of the volume we saw in 2019 and 2021, or maybe 2021 and 2022.
But we know that that volume isn't going to be exactly the same kinds of kids. It isn't all
going to be cardiac cases or just, you know, going to be different kinds of cases or maybe
broken bones or whatever. So we wanted to try and simulate a bunch of times just using Monte
Carlo, of course, simulate a bunch of times and look at what would be a likely scenario.
And then will it fit with our new placement model, knowing that some of the beds are going to be
carved out for this new unit. So that's what this app was for. And this is one that's still ongoing
because we're working with the hospital leadership to understand the different models they're
suggesting and to see if it'll even make sense from this, looking at it kind of historical data
and this modeling. So the very first step we did, of course, was show them what's going on with the
hospital, right? Where do kids get admitted to? Where do they discharge from? And we actually
track this more granularly to look at all the units they might stop. And if they go to imaging
or lab, but we want to understand the movement throughout the hospital. And this is just kind
of a retrospective look at that using Plotly with the kind of in a Sankey diagram here.
At the same time, we also looked at all the historical data. And you'll see now it's just
kind of an interesting chart because we're showing what we call tarp levels. So if we get up to like
17 or 18, here we go yellow, that might mean we might need to change staffing or resource planning,
or we may think about having to move kids to a different unit, possibly. And this distribution
here is an example of all the hourly census values that we've generated for the hospital.
So and we've done this by unit, we did it by service, and we did it by kind of cohort of kids
based on like diagnosis and attending providers. And again, so we're looking at how can we find
out what is a representative way to look at the populations before we ever talked about doing any
kind of simulation. So again, this is a retrospective look, look at that. And then we
decided, all right, now that we have all this data, and we have these distributions, and we understand
the distribution of kids and where they fit, that's kind of do this Monte Carlo simulation,
right? And then project these cohorts going to planned units and look at kind of the activity
map to say, when are we going to be at that red tarp level, where we know that we won't have
enough staff or enough beds for a given unit. And then we can kind of score the different units
and the different models to understand that this model is going to fit or not. And here's your
likelihood. And here's your confidence interval, saying this is what we think it might look like
for a given year. And so we have a couple of different models created. And then we can kind
of just run these scenarios. And so we've been helping them in this kind of a unique way, I think,
of doing this simulation just to understand, does this even make sense to suggest a model like this,
which is what we ended up doing. So we're just currently in this, we're working on this right now.
This is kind of just like a work in progress. But I thought it was interesting that we started to
apply, like at first we did the initial heat maps where we just looked at volumes, but it wasn't a
lot of meaning until we applied that tarp level on top to say, yeah, when it gets to be this dark,
it actually is a red tarp. And so we should be concerned at the end of the year. And this is
like flu season, right, where it's starting to be worse. And so we started to think about
different ways to visualize that same thing. We actually went and also did it,
instead of a heat map, say how green is green and how red is red. And so we actually put that
just across a histogram like this. So we could kind of look at how deep into the red we were
going or how green we really were to know if we had capacity, or if a unit could maybe take
patients from a different unit as we start to think about kind of pop off units for when we
get to high volume situations. I think that was all I wanted to cover with that right now.
There's definitely more work. We did some work on patient churn. I think maybe that would be a great
segue for another talk at a different time. But we definitely are using Shiny heavily. And this
one is, like I said, one of the most recent apps we've done. And so a lot of our learning has kind
of fallen into this one. We've kind of switched over to Plotly now for most of our interactive
charts away from High Charter. I think the licensing is a little nicer and the flexibility
we're getting with Plotly, where we can do the Sankey diagrams, we can do these kind of charts,
and we can do a lot more manipulation of what we show in visualization.
I did have just one final slide, probably just talking about scoring and measurement.
When we think about data science, I'm always thinking about how to score things or how to
put things in context for people. And so we actually do look at scoring the individual
units and then providing a rolled up score for the entire facility, which is our Milwaukee
campus hospital. So we actually do that same kind of level of scoring here. And then we actually
will build up some kind of report cards for the different models that get suggested.
I think I saved us five minutes for questions.
Thank you so much, Chris. That was an amazing presentation and awesome just to see all the
different ways that you're using R. I know a lot of people would probably love to be able to use
some of these shiny apps as well and fit them to their own use cases too. So maybe in the future,
we'd be able to get something from GitHub. There's a few more questions that we didn't get a chance
to answer yet. So if anybody has to leave, Chris did say he'd be happy to answer any other questions
in like a blog post or on our R in Healthcare Slack channel, which Shannon is going to share
a little bit more about. But let's take time for two more questions. Matt had asked, how long does
it take to go from concept to production for a project like this? Does the engineering work occur
before or alongside your build? Yeah, I would say it's very iterative. I mean, the COVID app we
brought up within a week or two, because that could build on the other dashboards. So once we
have something scripted, we kind of have these templates or skeletal apps that we can quickly
pull something together. We definitely are leveraging our great analysts and our data
engineers who pull a lot of the data together for us before we ever have to work on a problem.
So that inpatient modeling I just showed you, that work, it started for me at the end of April.
So really, that app came together and the simulation and runs since April. I mean, so
I think it's very rapid. And I think that's the power of R, right? And it's like, we just can be
so iterative and responsive in a short amount of time once you're, you know, fluent in it, of course.
Awesome. So one more question before I turn it over to you, Shannon, to share the slack. But
Mara had asked, what type or amount of clinician involvement do you have on your team?
So we always, yeah, that's, hopefully I made that clear. I mean, for sure, I don't know all
this stuff. We definitely are partnering on every step of the way. We have a CMIO who works
very closely with analytics. Like I said, our enterprise analytics is not in the IS group.
We're outside of IS. We're within our health management group, which is like a population
health team, similar to it. And so then we have actually have nurses, RNs on that team as well.
But then any kind of request that comes in, we're always working with providers side by side,
which is so enjoyable. I mean, that's one great thing about children's,
but it definitely, you know, we give a lot of involvement and that makes us successful, I think,
which is also a kind of a metric we use as we start to look at new projects too,
is how invested the business side is in it before we go too far with it.
Thank you so much, Chris. And as I mentioned, if there are any questions went unanswered,
I'm going to send those over to Chris as well, so that we can share those with everyone.
But Shannon, I want you to be able to share the Slack too.
I'm sorry, I'll stop.
Yeah, so we have created an RN Healthcare Slack channel so that, you know, the conversation can
continue after this session and beyond. I know that there are a lot of great questions for Chris,
and I think some of those questions might be good topics for broader discussion as well.
So please feel free to join that Slack group. I'm going to put the link in the chat again.
And we're also going to be sending out a Google form if anyone wants to
suggest speakers or volunteer to speak. We'd love to do these more regularly. I think this was
an awesome talk, and I'd love to see more from members of the community as well.
Thank you, Shannon. And I will echo everything that Shannon just said. We'd love to have these
more regularly as well. So thank you all so much for joining, and thank you so much,
Chris. This was amazing. Oh, thank you very much. Thank you, everyone.